so I grew up in Argentina which means I
always had a problem with confidence my
problem is I have too much of it and in
Argentina this is quite common we have
charming tendency to think that we are
the greatest country in the world even
though our nation has been declining for
about 100 years we are according to some
economic standards the only perpetually
devolving nation in the world and to
cope with this or maintain or delusion
we also have the highest concentration
of psychoanalysts per capita in the
world and if you don't want to spend
your life in therapy you can do what I
did which is you become a psychologist
yourself so I've always been interested
in the relationship between confidence
how smart do you think you are and
competence how smart you actually are
and for about 10 years I've been
conducting studies relating people's
self perceived abilities with their
actual abilities not just in Argentina
but in about 40 different countries and
the surprising fact is that there is a
very weak relationship between
competence and confidence not because
most people are overly modest or under
confident but because the vast majority
of people think they're better than they
actually are
so overconfidence
is one of the most pervasive biases in
human thought and if you read popular
psychology textbooks or are into the
self-help industry you will know that
there are two individual advantages of
being overconfident number one it does
feel good to think you're great
even if you are deluded number two that
delusion can help you fool other people
and yet there is a dark side of
overconfidence that is hardly ever
emphasized for example overconfidence
explains why some people are much more
likely to have traffic accidents where
the drivers cyclists or pedestrians
while some people gamble and are into
compulsive pathological levels of
gambling and why we have financial
gambling cases such as the last Melton
which are caused not just by greedy
investment bankers but also
overconfident consumers who overestimate
their ability to pay back their loans
and mortgages or wreak on fidence is
also behind major health threats and it
explains why smokers drinkers drug users
illegal or legal and compulsive eaters
are in denial about their addictions and
overestimate their ability to quit or
underestimate the potential harmful
effects that these addictions might have
on them even when they're aware of them
they think it will happen to other
people not to themselves and finally
overconfidence also fosters and promotes
a narcissistic culture a narcissistic
society where we commonly mistake
confidence by competence which is why in
any domain or profession of expertise
there are so many charlatans in business
why arrogant and psychopathic employees
are commonly promoted to managerial
levels why we have not enough women in
charge because there are more modest and
more under-confident yes
it's true it's a fact and also why so
many people especially teenagers our
obsessed would be in famous just for the
sake of being famous and spend so much
time worshiping those who worship
themselves and why some of you might
spend so much time updating your
Facebook status hoping that others like
what you're doing and you know luckily
they can't dislike it they can only like
it so what's the solution and I want to
finish on a negative note which which
really is for your benefit and for our
benefit collect the benefit maybe it's
better to see the glass as half-empty
and not enough has been said emphasizing
the positive power of negative thinking
there are key adaptational benefits to
your insecurities and to low confidence
for example low confidence is a threat
detection signal that tells you that you
shouldn't be doing something you know if
you hear a little inner voice that tells
you you shouldn't do something consider
yourself lucky maybe you should pay
attention to it at the same time the
reason why so many people suffer from
having low self-concept is because this
signal is emphasizing a discrepancy
between the person you want to be and
the person you think you are so what you
should do about it is try to reduce that
discrepancy or that gap between
confidence and competence by working
hard not by reading self-help books that
tell you that you shouldn't worry about
your self-esteem that you're great no
matter what other people think of you
and finally low confidence and
insecurities are key to keep us modest
humble and there are many advantages to
modesty it keeps us attentive to
negative feedback which means that we
are more coachable it also stops her
from being complacent and it also make
us makes us more likeable and this is
coming from a recovering Argentine so
the message is clear a less confident
world would be a better world thank you
very much
[Applause]